

A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 2078

        Title:      Generic Security Service Application Program
                    Interface, Version 2
        Author:     J. Linn
        Date:       January 1997
        Mailbox:    John.Linn@ov.com
        Pages:      85
        Characters: 185990
        Obsoletes:  1508

        URL:        ftp://ds.internic.net/rfc/rfc2078.txt


This memo revises RFC-1508, making specific, incremental changes in
response to implementation experience and liaison requests. It is
intended, therefore, that this memo or a successor version thereto
will become the basis for subsequent progression of the GSS-API
specification on the standards track.  This document is a product of
the Common Authentication Technology Working Group.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for the
Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions for
improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the "Internet
Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the standardization state and
status of this protocol.  Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@CNRI.RESTON.VA.US.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@ISI.EDU.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@ISI.EDU with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@ISI.EDU
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to admin@DS.INTERNIC.NET.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.

Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@ISI.EDU.  Please consult RFC 1543, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.


Joyce K. Reynolds and Mary Kennedy
USC/Information Sciences Institute

